European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen has said it is time to “think about mandatory vaccination” amid the fast-spreading Omicron coronavirus variant.
Von der Leyen said on Wednesday that a common approach on vaccinations at the EU level is needed – although only individual member states can impose vaccine mandates.
Meanwhile, Saudi Arabia has confirmed its first case of the new Omicron coronavirus variant as countries tighten restrictions on international travel in an attempt to slow its spread.
Scientists have been scrambling to learn more about the effects of the Omicron variant, first detected in South Africa last week.
It remains unclear where or when the variant first emerged. But nations have rushed to impose travel restrictions, especially on visitors coming from Southern Africa, despite the World Health Organization’s call for “rational” measures in response to the new strain.
Here are the latest updates:

33 mins ago (16:47 GMT)
Omicron present in five out of nine South Africa provinces: institute
The Omicron variant has been detected in five out of nine South African provinces and accounted for 74 percent of the virus genomes sequenced in November, data from the country’s National Institute for Communicable Diseases showed.

60 mins ago (16:20 GMT)
WHO expects to have more information on Omicron transmission ‘within days’
The UN agency WHO expects to have more information on the transmissibility of the Omicron strain within days, its technical lead on COVID-19, Maria van Kerkhove, said in a briefing.
That was faster than the “weeks” the WHO had predicted last week that it would take to assess the data available on the variant after designating it a “variant of concern”, its highest rating.
She said one possible scenario was that the new variant, which was first reported in southern Africa, may be more transmissible than the dominant Delta variant. She said it was not yet known if Omicron makes people more ill.

1 hour ago (15:59 GMT)
WHO warns of ‘toxic mix’ of low vaccine coverage and testing
The World Health Organization warned a “toxic mix” of low testing rates and vaccination coverage was creating fertile breeding ground for new coronavirus variants.
The WHO said measures to stop the globally-dominant Delta variant would also hinder Omicron, first discovered in November in southern Africa and which has since rattled countries around the world.
WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus called on countries to optimise their public health and social measures to control the spread of COVID-19.

Media briefing on #COVID19 with @DrTedros https://t.co/i3aJDixpiz
— World Health Organization (WHO) (@WHO) December 1, 2021


2 hours ago (15:26 GMT)
EU chief calls for ‘discussion’ on mandatory COVID jabs
European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen said the EU should lead discussions on mandatory vaccinations against COVID-19 amid efforts to contain the Omicron variant.
Even though vaccination is a national competence and for member states to make mandatory or not, Von der Leyen said that a common approach and a discussion at EU level would be needed and appropriate.
“I think it is understandable and appropriate to lead this discussion now, how we can encourage and potentially think about mandatory vaccination within the European Union, this needs discussion,” she said.
European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen [File: Yves Herman/Pool/Reuters]

2 hours ago (14:51 GMT)
South Korea reports first five cases of Omicron
South Korea confirmed its first five cases of the new omicron coronavirus variant in people linked to arrivals from Nigeria, prompting the government to tighten the country’s borders.
The Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency said the cases include a couple who arrived from Nigeria on November 24 and a friend who drove them home from the airport.
The two other cases were women who also traveled to Nigeria and returned to South Korea on November 23.

3 hours ago (14:05 GMT)
German ICUs expect coronavirus surge to hit hospitals at Christmas: Health association
Germany is likely to reach a peak of its fourth wave of COVID-19 infections by mid-December and this could mean 6,000 intensive care beds occupied by Christmas, the country’s association for intensive care medicine (DIVI) said.
Andreas Schuppert, a forecaster for the DIVI association, told a news conference he was “moderately optimistic” the peak in new cases would come in the next two weeks, but warned this would take time to have its full impact on hospitals.
“It is an ominous situation,” DIVI president Gernot Marx told reporters. “We would be well advised to react immediately. We must get ahead of the situation.”
Germany has recorded over 5.9 million cases since the start of the pandemic [File: Thomas Kienzle/AFP]

Hello. This is Usaid Siddiqui taking over from my colleague Farah Najar in Doha, Qatar.

4 hours ago (13:07 GMT)
France to lift ban on Southern Africa flights from Saturday
France has said it will start allowing flights from Southern Africa to land on its territory from Saturday, but with “drastic” restrictions allowing only French and European Union residents to disembark, along with diplomats and flight crews.
These travellers must undergo a COVID test upon arrival, with a negative result still requiring a seven-day quarantine, while a positive test will require a 10-day quarantine, said government spokesman Gabriel Attal after a weekly cabinet meeting.

5 hours ago (12:49 GMT)
Vietnam to suspend flights to, from seven African countries
Vietnam will suspend flights to and from seven African countries over concerns about the spread of the Omicron variant, state media reported.
The Civil Aviation Authority of Vietnam has approved the suspension, the Lao Dong newspaper reported, without saying when the move will come into effect.

5 hours ago (12:38 GMT)
All travellers from outside EU need negative COVID test: France
Travellers reaching France from outside the EU will be subject to the obligation of a negative COVID-19 test, regardless of their vaccination status, French government spokesman Gabrial Attal has said.
Talking to journalists after a government meeting, Attal said decisions regarding intra-EU travel would be coordinated by European leaders later this week.

5 hours ago (12:35 GMT)
Portugal will tighten COVID curbs around Christmas if needed: PM
Portugal’s government will not hesitate to impose restrictions during the Christmas festival if they are needed to control a recent surge in COVID-19 cases, Prime Minister Antonio Costa has said.
Despite having one of the world’s highest vaccination rates, a recent uptick in infections and the emergence of the Omicron variant has prompted the government to reimpose some restrictions since Wednesday.
When asked if the government might take further restrictive measures during Christmas, Costa said: “We all wish that these measures are not necessary, but if they become necessary, we will take these measures.
“We must always be vigilant to take new measures, if necessary. That’s how we’ve been living for the past two years and we’ve managed to prevail, although it’s been hard for everyone,” Costa told reporters.
		


					
					
					
				

		

5 hours ago (11:53 GMT)
Ghana records first cases of Omicron variant
Ghana’s health ministry has detected the country’s first cases of the Omicron variant in passengers who arrived at the Kotoka International Airport in Accra following sequencing that was carried out on November 21, the Director General of the Ghana Health Service said.

6 hours ago (11:45 GMT)
EU pushes for daily travel reviews, mass booster shots
The EU needs daily reviews of its travel restrictions and rapid deployment of vaccine booster doses to limit entry and protect its citizens from the Omicron variant, the European Commission has said.
Europe is experiencing a surge of COVID-19 cases and a growing number of infections by the Omicron variant.
“We are now facing a double challenge in the fight against COVID-19,” European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen said in a tweet. “The rapid resurgence of Delta across Europe and a new variant of concern: Omicron.”

We are now facing a double challenge in the fight against #COVID19.
The rapid resurgence of Delta across Europe and a new variant of concern: Omicron.
Full vaccination and boosters provide the strongest protection there is. And they are available now. https://t.co/FOuda4Jbvj
— Ursula von der Leyen (@vonderleyen) December 1, 2021

6 hours ago (11:09 GMT)
Norway detects its first two Omicron cases, municipality says
Norway has identified its first two cases of the Omicron variant, the west coast municipality of Oeygarden said.
The two infected people had been on a trip to South Africa. Both of them are currently recovering from the infection, Mayor Tom Georg Indrevik said in a statement.
Norway on Friday decided to impose a quarantine on any travellers arriving from South Africa or neighbouring countries, following a similar decision by Denmark.

7 hours ago (10:35 GMT)
Uzbekistan restricts travel over Omicron concerns
Uzbekistan has said it would suspend flights to and from Hong Kong, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Lesotho, Madagascar, Mozambique, Namibia, Eswatini, Tanzania and South Africa from December 3 to curb the spread of the Omicron variant.
The Central Asian nation’s health ministry said residents of those nations and people who have recently visited them would be unable to enter Uzbekistan, while those arriving from Egypt, Israel, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Britain, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, and the Czech Republic would be quarantined for 10 days.

8 hours ago (09:41 GMT)
Countries launch WHO pandemic accord talks
World Health Organization member states agreed to start work on building a new international accord setting out how to handle the next global pandemic.
Countries adopted a resolution at a special meeting in Geneva, launching the process that should result in a new agreement on pandemic preparedness and response coming into force in 2024.
“The text before us is the product of extensive discussions, of frank exchanges and of compromises,” said Australia’s ambassador Sally Mansfield, who co-chaired the working group. “Let us move forward together in solidarity to do the hard work that we have ahead of us.”

8 hours ago (08:54 GMT)
Saudi Arabia confirms first case of Omicron variant
Saudi Arabia has detected its first case of the new Omicron variant, the state-run Saudi Press Agency (SPA) has reported.
Quoting a source from the health ministry, SPA said the infected individual has been isolated along with those who were in close contact with them.
It is the first Omicron variant case reported in the Gulf region. The health ministry said the person was a Saudi national who had travelled from a North African country, without giving further details.
The Saudi ministry urged people to complete their vaccination and ordered travellers to respect self-isolation and testing rules.
A man displays his details on his mobile phone using the Tawakkalna app, which was launched by Saudi authorities to track people infected with the coronavirus, as he enters the Al-Othaim market in Riyadh [File: Ahmed Yosri/Reuters]

9 hours ago (08:43 GMT)
Danish concert-goer confirmed infected with Omicron variant
A person infected with the Omicron variant participated in a large concert on Saturday, the Danish Patient Safety Authority has said.
The person was one of 1,600 people attending a concert with Danish DJ Martin Jensen in the northern city of Aalborg on Saturday.
Denmark has already confirmed four cases of the new Omicron variant, all of whom had travelled to South Africa.
A spokesperson for the Danish Patient Safety Authority could not verify if the infected concert-goer had been travelling.

9 hours ago (08:42 GMT)
EU launch of COVID shot for younger children advanced to Dec 13
The EU-wide rollout of Pfizer and BioNTech’s COVID-19 vaccine version for five- to 11-year-old children will begin on December 13, one week earlier than previously planned, Germany’s health ministry has said.
Germany is due to receive 2.4 million doses for use as a two-dose regimen, the ministry said, adding it has a commitment on the new date from the manufacturer.
“Given the current pandemic situation, this is good news for parents and children. Many are awaiting this eagerly,” acting Health Minister Jens Spahn said in the statement.

9 hours ago (08:41 GMT)
First two cases of Omicron variant detected in Brazil
The first two cases of the Omicron variant were detected in Brazil, which could also be the first cases in Latin America.
Samples from two Brazilians who tested positive for the variant through the renowned Albert Einstein Hospital would be sent for confirmatory laboratory analysis, a statement from Brazil’s health surveillance agency Anvisa said.
According to the news portal G1, the cases involve Brazilian missionaries living in South Africa.

9 hours ago (08:09 GMT)
UK urges people to book booster shots as Omicron cases grow
British Health Secretary Sajid Javid has urged people to book a COVID-19 booster shot as he said there were 22 confirmed cases of the Omicron virus variant in the country.
Javid said the government believed a booster campaign would help protect against severe disease from Omicron, even if it turns out that vaccines are not as effective against the variant as previous strains of the disease.
Britain plans to offer all adults a COVID-19 booster shot by the end of January. Government data shows 81 percent of the population aged above 12 have had two doses of the vaccine, while 32 percent have had a booster shot or third dose.
Pedestrians wearing face masks walk along Regent Street in London [Alastair Grant/AP Photo]

9 hours ago (08:06 GMT)
Closing borders not the ‘answer’, WHO’s Nicksy Gumede-Moeletsi says
Dr Nicksy Gumede-Moeletsi of WHO Africa has said they are trying to warn other countries of the “emergency that might be coming through”, adding that shutting down borders is not the answer.
“Those countries, they’re going to … try their level best to get prepared,” she said.
“But closing the borders, or banning certain countries from entering – I don’t think is the answer.”

9 hours ago (07:55 GMT)
If you’re not vaccinated, get vaccinated: Fauci
Dr Anthony Fauci, the US’s top infectious disease official, has urged those who are not vaccinated to get the jab, and those who are, to seek a booster shot.
“If you’re not vaccinated, get vaccinated,” Fauci said. “Get boosted if you are vaccinated,” he added.
He also called on people to continue to use the “mitigation methods”, such as wearing “masks, avoiding crowds and poorly ventilated spaces”.
“Choose outdoors rather than indoors, keep your distance, wash your hands, test and isolate if appropriate,” he added.

10 hours ago (07:42 GMT)
France extends suspension of flights from high-risk Southern African countries
France has decided to extend until at least Saturday its suspension of flights from Southern African countries which have been hit hard by the Omicron variant, said French European Affairs Minister Clement Beaune.
“As of this morning, we have extended the suspension of flights from seven Southern African countries until Saturday,” Beaune told RTL radio.

10 hours ago (07:41 GMT)
Air travellers to US set to face tougher COVID-19 testing
The US is moving to require that all air travellers entering the country show a negative COVID-19 test performed within one day of departure in response to concerns about the new Omicron variant, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) said.
Currently, vaccinated international air travellers can present a negative test result obtained within three days from their point of departure. Nearly all foreign nationals must be vaccinated to enter the United States. Unvaccinated travellers currently must get a negative COVID-19 test within one day of arrival.
The new one-day testing requirement would apply equally to US citizens as well as foreign nationals.

10 hours ago (07:28 GMT)
Japan halts new incoming flight bookings over Omicron strain
Japan has asked airlines to stop taking new incoming flight bookings over concerns about the Omicron variant, the transport ministry said.
“We have asked airlines to halt accepting all new incoming flight reservations for one month starting December 1,” a transport ministry official told the AFP news agency, adding that existing bookings would not be affected.
		


					
					
					
				

		

10 hours ago (07:04 GMT)
German state reports four fully vaccinated people infected with Omicron
Four people in southern Germany have tested positive for the Omicron variant even though they were fully vaccinated against the coronavirus, the public health office in the state of Baden-Wuerttemberg said.
Three of the infected people returned from a business trip to South Africa on November 26 and November 27 respectively, and the fourth person is a family member of one of the returnees, the state public health office said.
“All four people are fully vaccinated. A mutation analysis carried out by the State Health Office has confirmed that all of them are infected with the new variant of concern,” the office said in a statement, adding that all four were in quarantine.
All four showed moderate symptoms.

10 hours ago (06:55 GMT)
Japan detects second case of Omicron variant
Japan has found a second person who has tested positive with the Omicron strain, broadcaster FNN reported.
The first case of the variant was discovered on Tuesday.
The country expanded its travel ban covering all foreign inbound travellers – including temporary or permanent residents – from South Africa and nine nearby countries beginning on Thursday.

11 hours ago (06:47 GMT)
Nigeria confirms Omicron cases
Nigeria has confirmed two cases of the new Omicron coronavirus variant among travellers who arrived in the country last week from South Africa.
The Nigeria Centre for Disease Control (NCDC) also said retrospective sequencing of previously confirmed cases among passengers to Nigeria had identified the mutation among a sample collected in October. It did not provide further details.
“Given the highly likely increased transmissibility of the Omicron variant, it is imperative to put in place measures to curb community transmission,” the NCDC said in a statement.
		


					
					
					
				

		

11 hours ago (06:06 GMT)
Malaysia to ban travellers from countries with Omicron cases
Malaysia will temporarily ban the entry of travellers from countries that have reported cases of the Omicron variant or are considered high-risk, its health ministry has said.
It will also delay plans to set up so-called Vaccinated Travel Lanes with those countries, Health Minister Khairy Jamaluddin said.

11 hours ago (06:06 GMT)
UK reports new cases
The United Kingdom has reported eight new cases of the Omicron variant, taking the total number to 13.
British Prime Minister Boris Johnson said a new COVID-19 lockdown was unlikely despite worries about the new variant.

11 hours ago (06:02 GMT)
US panel backs first-of-a-kind COVID-19 pill
A panel of US health advisers narrowly backed a closely watched COVID-19 pill from Merck, setting the stage for a likely authorisation of the first drug that Americans could take at home to treat the coronavirus.
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) panel voted 13-10 that the antiviral drug molnupiravir’s benefits outweigh its risks, including potential birth defects if used during pregnancy.
“I see this as an incredibly difficult decision with many more questions than answers,” said panel chair Dr Lindsey Baden of Harvard Medical School, who voted in favour of the drug. He said the FDA would have to carefully tailor the drug’s use for patients who stand to benefit most.
Molnupiravir has already been authorised for use in the United Kingdom.